---
title: Preparing for UW Co-op, Part II
date: 2014-07-11
template: post.jade
preamble: This is the second post of several to help incoming University of Waterloo Computer Science of Software Engineering students prepare for the competitive co-op program at Waterloo. You can read the first post <a href="/blog/posts/preparing-for-uw-coop-part-one/">here</a>.  
---

The co-op program at the University of Waterloo provides many incredible
opportunities for Computer Science and Software Engineering students. Having two
years of work experience before graduating allows students to apply concepts
learned in class, grows their professional networks, and gives them real-world
work experience.

The Waterloo co-op program attracts the best employers by having some of the
most talented student software engineers in the world. One of the best ways to
get ahead in this talented community is to build cool things. Side projects are 
evidence of ability, independence, motivation, and a good work ethic; these
things are what all the good employers are looking for.

It's more important to 

### Structured Learning

Some of you might be taking an online course or two already this summer, whether
it be on Udacity, Coursera, or another platform. Others might have read a book
about a programming language, or about how to make mobile apps, or about some
other thing. Usually, one will take a course about a topic if theyAll of these
resources are structured learning: instructors (or authors) will tell you some
facts, and maybe ask you to do some things, and then repeat this process for the
next lesson. It will be them that decides what you will be told next, and it
will be them that decides, in total, what you will have learned and done if you
complete every lesson and every exercise in the material. In a sense, these blog
posts are structured learning.

Structured learning is a great tool to get you started in a subject. Sometimes
you don&rsquo;t know enough about a subject to start somewhere and add little
pieces of knowledge until you know everything about it; this is when structured
learning shines. You will be guided right from the start, so you don&rsquo;t
have to worry about getting started.

One important thing that structured thing gives you is a way to evaluate
yourself. For me, not being able to tell that I&rsquo;m doing a good job is a
huge barrier to getting started with something. How can I know that the website
I built is good? How do I know that the code I wrote is good code? A course on
web application development will teach you the basics of password management,
like how you shouldn&rsquo;t store them in plain text, how to use one-way
hashing functions, etc; if your website has passwords, this is one way you will
learn to evaluate your website. A beginner programming course might start to
teach you how to reason about how fast some code will run, for example; this is
one way to evaluate how good some code is. 

A certain danger when doing structured learning is not applying the knowledge
you gain, and then losing it. Sometimes it isn&rsquo;t clear, though, how
you&rsquo;re supposed to apply the knowledge in the course; this is why courses
that tell you what to do with your knowledge are sometimes better than courses
that don&rsquo;t give you any exercises. In fact, one of the benefits of the
other kind of learning&mdash;unstructured learning&mdash;is that you usually
don&rsquo;t have to search for applications!

### Unstructured Learning

Unstructured learning is when you decide to forge your own path to learn about a
topic. Although you might incorporate bits from a tutorial here or a chapter
from some course as resources in your research, the difference is that it is
ultimately you that will decide what to research next.

This method of learning often isn&rsquo;t suitable for beginners. When starting
out with an entirely new subject, there are often barriers to progressing.
Intimidation is a real thing. It can be hard to believe that something is
possible to learn before it&rsquo;s broken down into small pieces; the final
target might make 0 sense until you learn preliminary things.
